# Enumeration of Derivative Structures
Examples of enumerating derivative structures are shown here.
Derivative structures are defined as nonequivalent substitutional configurations on a given lattice.
These structures will be used to perform DFT calculations for developing cluster expansion models and to identify ground-state structures by calculating the energies of all derivative structures.
The `graphillion` package is additionally required to enumerate the derivative structures.

## Enumeration of Derivative Structures for Single Lattice
### Binary Derivative Structures
Here is an example of enumerating binary derivative structures for a single lattice.
When the expansion degree is set to three, corresponding to possible supercell expansions of size three, all nonequivalent configurations on the lattice are enumerated.
The command line for performing this operation is as follows.
```shell
# > cat poscar-fcc-primitive
# generated by pyclupan
# 4.0
#   0.000000000  0.5000000000  0.5000000000
#   0.5000000000  0.000000000  0.5000000000
#   0.5000000000  0.5000000000  0.000000000
#  Ag
#   1
# Direct
#   0.000000000 0.000000000 0.000000000

> pyclupan -p poscar-fcc-primitive --supercell_size 3
```
The expansion degree can be given using the `--supercell_size` option.

If the composition of the derivative structures is constrained, the `--comp` option can be used.
In the `--comp` option, the element IDs (starting from zero) and their corresponding compositions must be specified for all elements.
```shell
# --comp element_id composition
> pyclupan -p fcc-primitive --supercell_size 3 --comp 0 0.3333333333 --comp 1 0.66666666666
```

The compositions do not need to be normalized; equivalently, they can be specified as follows.
```shell
> pyclupan -p fcc-primitive --supercell_size 3 --comp 0 1.0 --comp 1 2.0
```

The composition ranges can also be specified as input parameters.
The lower and upper bounds of the composition for each element can be defined.
```shell
> pyclupan -p fcc-primitive --supercell_size 6 --comp_lb 0 0.5 --comp_ub 0 0.67
```
In this example, only structures with compositions ranging from 0.5 to 0.67 for element 0 are enumerated.

If a specific supercell matrix is provided instead of the expansion degree, the `--hnf` option can be used.
A given one-dimensional sequence containing nine elements is reshaped into a 3x3 matrix using `np.reshape((3, 3))`.
```shell
# supercell = [[1, 0, 0]
#              [0, 2, 0]
#              [1, 0, 3]]

> pyclupan -p fcc-primitive --hnf 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 3
```

After running the derivative structure search, a result file named `derivative.yaml`, containing all possible labelings corresponding to the derivative structures, is generated.

### Beyond Binary Derivative Structures
Here is an example demonstrating the enumeration of ternary derivative structures for a single lattice.
The element types on the lattice are specified using the `-e` option.
In the example below, `-e 0 1 2` indicates that three different elements occupy the same underlying (single) lattice.

```shell
# > cat poscar-fcc-primitive
# generated by pyclupan
# 4.0
#   0.000000000  0.5000000000  0.5000000000
#   0.5000000000  0.000000000  0.5000000000
#   0.5000000000  0.5000000000  0.000000000
#  Ag
#   1
# Direct
#   0.000000000 0.000000000 0.000000000

(For Ternary)
> pyclupan -p poscar-fcc-primitive --supercell_size 3 -e 0 1 2

(For Quaternary)
> pyclupan -p poscar-fcc-primitive --supercell_size 4 -e 0 1 2 3
```

## Enumeration of Derivative Structures for Multiple Lattices
### Configurations on Single Lattice
Binary configurations on anion sites in the perovskite structure

### Configurations on Multiple Lattices
Ternary configurations on cation A and B sites and binary configurations on anion sites in the perovskite lattice

### More Complex Constraints
Ternary configurations on cation sites and binary configurations on anion sites at A2BCX5 in the perovskite structure. Cations A and B occupy two cation sites, and Cation C occupies perovskite B sites.

```shell
# Lattice ID 0: A sites, Lattice ID 1: B sites, Lattice ID 2: Anion sites
#  - Comp.(ele=0) = 1/2 of perovskite A and B sites
#  - Comp.(ele=1) = 1/4 of perovskite A and B sites
#  - Comp.(ele=2) = 1/2 of perovskite B sites
#  - Comp.(ele=3) = 5/6 of perovskite anion sites
#  - Comp.(ele=4) = 1/6 of perovskite anion sites

> pyclupan -p perovskite-unitcell --supercell_size 4 -o 0 1 -o 0 1 -o 1 -o 2 -o 2 -c 0 1/2 -c 1 1/4 -c 3 5/6
```

## Enumeration of Ionic Derivative Structures

Binary configurations on cation sites and binary configurations on anion sites in wurtzite lattice. Only derivative structures satisfying charge neutrality are enumerated.
```shell
# Lattice ID 0: cation sites, Lattice ID 1: anion sites
# ele 0 = Si, ele 1 = Al, ele 2 = C, ele 3 = N
# charge(Si) = 4, charge(Al) = 3, charge(C) = -4, charge(N) = -3

> pyclupan -p wurtzite-primitive -n 4 -e 0 1 -e 2 3 --charge 4 3 -4 -3
```
